Gad Saad teaches at the John Molson
School of Business at Concordia. He
studied at McGill and Cornell. He has
degrees in psychology and business and
in math and computer science. He
does research on hormones and consumer
behavior and of course is the host of
The Saad Truth his video show. So join me
in welcoming Gad Saad.
Thank you. Thank you guys. I don't know if
any of you have seen the classic movie
All About Eve (1950) with Bette Davis.
There is a scene, a classic scene where
she said - I can't remember the exact words - "Buckle up. It's going to be a bumpy ride."
So fasten your seat belts. Here we go. So
what I'm planning on doing is actually
offering you some testimony of many of
the maladies that are affecting or
afflicting our universities and then
I'll offer one or two prescriptive
solutions. One of the things that my book
agent told me as I'm working on my next
book as you said you can't just be the
guy to identify the diseases you've got
to give us the cures you've got to give
people hope and so in that spirit at the
end I'll had a few prescriptive comments.
Apologies to a few people who were at
the Civitas conference last week where I
also spoke a few of the slides overlap
so forgive the repetitiveness but for
most of you the repetition but for most
of you this hopefully will be new stuff
so I argue that there are two great
threats to humanity
well not argue that's reality they are
of course biological pathogens that come
in all sorts of manners sometimes there
bacterium sometimes there viruses
sometimes there parasites and they cause
more death throughout human history than
your fear of bears and sharks and so on
right but I argue that there's another
set another class of viruses these are
idea pathogens these are pathogens of
the human mind pathogens of the human
spirit that regrettably could
potentially be as dangerous as
biological pathogens and to kind of
further push this notion there are many
cases in nature where you as an
evolutionary psychologist of course I
often look at analogies and homologies
in the animal kingdom and so here are
some parasitic realities in nature and
then I'll link it to some of the things
that interest a group here so the spider
wasp is
much smaller organism than the spider on
which it eventually it eventually stings
it rendering it hapless dragging
it to the burrow where it then lays its
eggs and then its offspring
eat it in vivo now how is that related
to anything that we're interested in
here
well political correctness is
the spider wasp it stings us and then
haplessly leads us toward the abyss of
infinite darkness
Toxoplasma gondii is a parasite that
afflicts mice and when they're afflicted
with that parasite they lose their
innate fear of cats not a good
it's a maladaptive reality P. tenuis is
a brain worm that afflicts ungulates so
for example the moose and when that
moose is inflicted or afflicted with
that parasite it can do what's called
circling behavior so it just literally
goes around in a circle unable to
extricate itself from this behavior so
even as the looming predators are
approaching it can't extricate itself so
now how do we take some of these notions
and apply them to the realities we're
facing so they are idea pathogens:
"radical feminism," "post-modernism," "social
constructivism," "cultural and moral
relativism," "political correctness," "echo
chambers void of intellectual diversity."
"the culture of perpetual offensive
victimhood," "identity politics coupled
with progressive self flagellation." Each
of these are really really dangerous
idea pathogens and my next book
tentatively right now the title is The
Parasitic Mind where I actually sort of
lay out where which ecosystem do these
pathogens arise from universities and
then how do we try to inoculate
ourselves or free ourselves from some of
these idea pathogens and so I can break
up a lot of these
idea pathogens into three categories in
some cases we have idea pathogens that
attack basic scientific truths there is
no such thing as two phenotypes in Homo
sapiens there is no such thing as
biological sex that's a fundamental
attack on a reality that is obvious to
the average dull two-year-old but
apparently you're a Nazi bigot if you
think that biology matters then there
are attacks on the epistemology for
seeking truth right so there are
endless ways of knowing and your way of
knowing called the scientific method
should not be a privileged way post
modernism says there are no objective truths so in
this case it's not a specific truth that
you're attacking but you're attacking
the epistemology of how to go about
approaching getting to truth and then
thirdly there's a class of pathogens
that attacks the idea of what it is to
navigate through a meritocracy and
I'll give examples of each of these for
today's talk I'll begin with all those
sort of the feeling stuff that you all
know about we can then freedom of speech
that hurts other people's feelings okay
here is the for those of you who don't
know their work but I suspect in this
room probably most of you do the Justice
Center For Constitutional Freedoms comes
out with a yearly index where they rate
all Canadian universities on four
metrics university policies, university
practices, student Union policies, and
student union practices. So in this case
they rated 60 universities on these four
metrics so there are 240 possible grades
in a perfect world you'd have 240 A's.
There were six A's out of 240. Six A's.
Digest that. And 38 F's. Since we're at
Western I'm granting you the courtesy of
showing you how much you suck. Western,
you scored a C,D,D,C but just so that
you don't think that I'm not going to
show how bad how poorly my university
does we're a bit better than you
actually we're B,C,F,C but again neither
scores has anything to write home to
your parents about some of you may have
heard of this incident that happened
last summer
Jordan Peterson, myself, Oren Amitay, and
Faith Goldy were supposed to speak at a
conference titled The Stifling of Free
Speech on University Campus it was being
held at Ryerson University that speech
was stifled and the the the incredible
thing is that I was accused for those of
you who don't know I'm from Lebanon and
we're Jewish I was accused of being a
white supremacist, anti-semitic, Nazi so
when your moral compass has become so
broken that you actually feel emboldened
in making that accusation you suffer
from an idea pathogen let me just read
you this because it's very powerful
this is Edward Schlosser a professor at
a liberal some some liberal arts college
I can't remember which one if you want
to follow the sources at the bottom I
have intentionally adjusted my teaching
materials as the political winds have
shifted I also make sure all my remotely
offensive or challenging opinions such
as this article are expressed either
anonymously or pseudoanonomysly
most of my colleagues who
still have jobs have done the same
hurting a student's feelings even in the
course of instruction that is absolutely
appropriate and respectful can now get a
teacher into serious trouble I'll skip
the rest but he's basically saying the
way he organizes his pedagogic material
is to is he by putting it through the
sieve of can I be sure that not a single
syllable that I say will offend a single
person and that's astonishing but that's
not North Korea that's not Cuba that's
here
now for those of you who think that you
only have to worry about Big Brother
University monitoring your speech on
campus no University of New Hampshire has
come up with the wonderful liberating
idea of monitoring students speech not
while they are under the purview of some
University function as private
citizens if they say something that
might create an environment that is
hostile then they could be sanctioned
again not under the guise of there being
you know students at a university I mean
that's astonishing you just have to read
the start of this article right so big
brother is watching you even when you're
not on campus that's happened to me let
me tell you a story now this will go
into whether it is what was it honest
civility what was the term what was the
dichotomy on yeah let's see if it's
honest incivility or width so this
degenerate act cell bio Josh who's a
incredibly obnoxious haughty guy I
didn't know who he was
he started sort of trolling me 99% of
the time I ignored his stuff I'm cool
once in a while I'm bored and I feel
like taking some guy on and I do it with
complete width and with a smile on my
face I decided to take this idiot on and
at one point because he was being so
haughty I said no no the retarded
schmuck recently learned how to
pronounce vowels respect him okay I had
no idea who this guy was
I mean literally no idea he's an
anonymous guy on Twitter it could be a
guy a woman I don't know
he starts by tweeting to my university
he's hurt he's been attacked
it's homophobia so then other people
respond to him what do you talk about
why is it homophobic what are you
talking about I don't know what his
sexual orientation is I don't know if
he's a man or a woman he says well the
use of the word degenerate which is not
here not in this tweet has homophobic
connotations so then he tries to rile up
my university that way it doesn't work
then he tries to rile up the social
justice warriors it doesn't work
he contacts my university okay this is
happening in the 21st century in Canada
he contacts my university to complain
about this tweet by the way Twitter take
kicks me off the platform for 12 hours
right because his feelings are so
precious that me calling him retarded
schmuck after he was attacking me was
something that he simply could not
handle is this someone as an adult who
could function healthily in society
anyways the university contacts me after
hours politely to question me about this
can you guess how that conversation went
I said so you contacted me your
contacting me
after hours because you think that it is
within your purview to question what I
say to whom when I'm not operating as a
professor for oh but professor Saad he's
a student I said he's a student
somewhere he's not my student it's not
it wasn't under my guys as his professor
it turns out that he's a graduate
student in Australia so retarded schmuck
was so hostile to him that the ten
thousand miles separating us was not
enough for him to feel protected but the
fact that the university felt
sufficiently embolden to not laugh him
out but to follow up tells you the state
that we're in continuing with sort of
the coddling and we're all special
here's a fantastic source this is the
gentleman the source that I'm showing
you that he said he used to be a
professor at Duke University showing you
the Great Inflation from 1983 all the
way to 2013 it's astonishing
the average grades used to be seized the
average grades now are hovering towards
AIDS look at the next slide professor
Matt Steffey
that's exactly right
as somebody who studies consumer
psychology I detest the metaphor of
students as consumers and so on and we
are service providers we're not
professors where we're providing a
service well here you see that the most
common grade that is now received is an
a 45% of grades of all grades assigned
are A's
it used to be seized so if any of you
graduated you know with honors or
Comelec
today that grade would not pass this is
an article that I wrote a while ago and
it's only gotten worse the article was
titled I'll have large fries a hamburger
a diet coke and an MBA hold the pickles
yeah and this is as I've obtained an MBA
but when I obtained the MBA I think it
was 67 credits it was two full years
four semesters of five to six courses
graduate courses a semester for you to
finish 25 years later it's roughly half
that I think now it's about 40-something
well what happened what I mean why is it
that 20 years ago you'd have to pass
through a much much larger hoop to get
the MBA well because you know market
conditions people are busy we have to
water it down you could do it on the
weekend you could with that's attacking
the integrity of the academic process I
won't read this whole thing but just to
kind of give you some good news here's
the archetype of what I would consider
the ideal student this is an email that
I received just a few days ago from a
student who had done very poorly in my
course yet wrote to me to simply say I'm
sorry that I did poorly I think you're
great your course was fantastic I take
responsibility what for having done
poorly and this is the first time that
someone writes this I appreciate this
spiritual experience now that's some
good feedback when a student is able to
characterize your course as a spiritual
experience that's a good thing so in
this case the student is taking personal
responsibility they're being
intrinsically motivated that's
certainly the type of trace that we need
to be fostering in our students I always
tell my students when they are thinking
about you know whining about their
grades I give them the following analogy
when I go see my physician and he gives
me my cholesterol scores I don't
negotiate for a better cholesterol score
my cholesterol score is it and so your
grade is it down to the last two
decimals and usually I don't end up
having any problems with them not only
is grading racist peer review reviewed
research is research so the process by
which we adjudicate good ideas from bad
ones using the peer review process that
inherently itself is a form of white
supremacy so this is some of you would
of course know this case UBC law
professor Lorna June McHugh argued that
the peer review process is antithetical
to her oral traditions and the Human
Rights Tribunal said yeah that sounds
like a good idea let's let's talk about
it and then of course I added here and
this is because it's it's as someone
who's now been a professor for almost 25
years I see it if you go through the ten
year process rest assured you're going
to get tenure as as long as you're not a
white male and I know this from personal
experience I mean not not me but having
sat on tenure committees every single
case is overturned so I could we could
sit there we could waste tons of time it
goes through the different layers a
person has not been in the least bit
productive and then they refuse tenure
and then you show up the next year oh
look they're here and you never find out
what happened but you know that they
simply filed some grievance you know
that they weren't a white male and
somehow the denial of their tenure was
overturned
so as I strolled hear productivity is
for suckers your identity is your CV
since of course the whole peer review
process and tenure is all part of white
supremacy I decided to give you a list
of things that have now been defined as
being white supremacy now I won't go
through all of these sorry what is it
but yeah pump pumpkins lotta actually
it's it's pumpkins lotta Disney taking
exam meritocracy voting for Trump having
white children is white supremacy Thomas
Jefferson statue white marble and
artwork sciences white supremacy
capitalism mathematics free speech
medieval studies university mascots
Halloween costumes milk is a form of
white nationalism saying all lives
matter is white supremacy promoting
diversity of thought the US Constitution
and I don't know what that means but the
invention of the white race is a form of
white supremacy this is not this is not
satire for those of you who watch my
stuff you know that I'm pretty big on
satire and sarcasm but they're always
beating me reality is always ahead of my
satire this is at Trent University in
Canada it's okay to be against whiteness
and look at the quote not not by Lindsey
Shepherd but by Lindsey Yeates the Trent
Central Student Association ethical
standards commissioner it sounds very
ominous whiteness uphold systems of
power like capitalism and patriarchy and
as we continue accessing and not
acknowledging the privilege of being
white we help to uphold these oppressive
systems so capitalism as an
instantiation of white supremacy the CBC
surprise contacted me to comment on this
and of course they took the following
quote they were they were accurate judge
people on their individual merits and
faults and let's stop with this identity
politics nonsense this is at my city one
of my alma mater McGill campus if any of
you have not watched this clip you
should it's a clip of a gathering of me
too you know at McGill it's it really is
astonishing it's difficult to watch it
and believe that this is truly happening
at a leading world institution they
start off by so this is a me too
you know the whole sexual assaults and
so on they start off by sort of pointing
to white men as being the problem
because of course there is no recorded
evidence whatsoever that any other men
engage in sexual violence other than
white men and then they apologize for
standing on stolen land
and then they engage in what's called a
progressive stack if those of you who
don't know what that is this is where if
you're given you know the platform to
speak you speak or not as a function of
where you rank and the progressive stack
so a white woman gets up and says well
you know I'm just a white woman so I
don't think I should be speaking so I'm
willing to cede my space if there are
any transgendered indigenous or people
of color and so on and so forth and but
this is not satire this is this and and
the people are are applauding her it's a
it's a wonderful thing so whether you
have a right to speak or not is a
function of where you rank and
victimology poker there is an ideology
and a legal system that treats people
this way does anybody know what that
system is called sorry it's called
Sharia law okay it's where I come from
in the Middle East
Sharia law is contrary to our systems of
law where we're it's supposed to be
blind justice it recognizes that a crime
is more or less severe as a function of
the identity of the two participants the
victim and the perpetrator will
determine their identity will determine
whether I should punish you in X or Y
identity politics is just a new
instantiation of that grotesque system
here's identity politics now shaping the
highest level of chaired professorships
that the Canadian government gives so
for those of you who are academics there
is the Canada Research Chair
now the Canadian government has put with
as the as part of the metrics that they
look at when they're deciding whether
who should get the Canada Research Chair
one of the things is you know are you
from an indigenous background or a woman
and so on that of course has come to
Concordia where at my university where
we have what's called the Concordia
University Research chairs which is a
shared professorship that I've held for
10 years
and my chair professorship ends this May
and so I was applying for my next chair
now here look what they wrote the
proportion of appointments by level of
faculty and principles of equity
diversity and inclusion and also they
talk about gender equity they put the
following figure so I was applying for
what's called a tier 1 chaired
professorship at the John Wilson School
of Business zero women have it three men
have it oh I went up against a
departmental colleague she obviates I
don't are those gays I'll leave it to
you to the side but I'm willing to put
them both up publicly and then you can
decide who should have gotten it and
it's not just the title it comes with
huge amounts of income stipend research
stipends course remissions so it's not
just oh gee I didn't get a nice title
there are real repercussions that affect
real people the good news for me though
is that the Canadian Senate taught me
that my gender can change on any given
day
and so therefore next year I plan to
apply with a much stronger dossier when
I'll be self identifying as a woman by
the way the gentleman in question here
you see this is me speaking in front of
the Canadian Senate regarding Bill c16
it was briefly mentioned I think earlier
today bill c16 nobody questions the fact
or at least if you truly are a
classically liberal person of course I
support the right of everybody to live
free of hate and bigotry and to have all
of the rights that are afforded to all
of us but I was in my case speaking as
an evolutionary psychologist in terms of
whether when is it going to be the case
that someone could say hey you're
talking about evolved sex differences in
your course which is sort of the
foundational mechanism natural and
sexual selection are the two mechanisms
they have illusionary mechanisms that
explain much of who we are well wouldn't
that be transphobic systemic violence
and quo
as Harvard said aren't eiper petting
quote fixed binaries and biological
essentialism so I was making a very
sober scientific argument as to the
potential dangers of vilsi 16 not
questioning the fact that all people
should live with full dignity and have
all the rights that are afforded to all
of us right
well whatever what happened to Lindsay
Shepherd is exactly what I was warning
against I mean not in those exact ways
that happened to her well this Senator
accused me of promulgating pro genocide
message you can go and watch it
so the Lebanese Jew who escaped
execution in Lebanon and came to Canada
to live freely here and is now trying to
protect people from all this nonsense
well as a pro genocide supporter this is
the discourse in the Canadian Senate you
can go all watch it now let's see if if
it is the case that the kind of the
research chairs and the Concordia
University Research chairs really need
to ramp up the help for women because
they're so marginalized in universities
we could use this thing called data to
try to decide whether that's true well
it turns out that the US government has
that data for us so they looked at five
races all the five racial breakdowns
across for educational attainment
associate degree bachelor's degree
master's degree and doctorate so there
are twenty cells five races by for
educational attainment and in each of
the cells you could look at what's the
ratio of male to females who obtain that
degree so if the if the victimology
narrative is true 20 out of 20 cells
would have men outnumbering women in
those cells what's the actual number 20
out of 20 cells women outnumber men so
so take a moment and process that every
single cell every race and every degree
women get more the
than men across the whole possible
landscape of data that doesn't get you
to question whether we should be having
a gender equity program well if we have
to have gender equity at this point it
should be the reverse one here is what
here's the rampant sexism of Canadian
medical schools women outnumber men now
at almost all the schools so that's why
you know we need to give them more perks
now again this is not questioning the
fact that for many many years
there was institutionalized sexism
against women no one is questioning that
and no but no one needs to lecture me
about that since I come from the Middle
East where there continues to be massive
endemic institutionalized sexism against
women and I speak out against it but we
need to be able to change the narrative
when the data no longer supports the
victimology narrative but apparently
you're a Nazi bigot if you do that let
me now give you some examples of attacks
on scientific truths and attacks on the
epistemology for generating truth some
of you may have seen the story if you
follow my work this is a story that
happened to me this is in 2002 and in a
second you understand what these two
images mean in 2002 one of my doctoral
students had just finished his PhD he's
actually now a Canada Research Chair
professor at Laurier his name is Tripp
odd Gill and we were going out to
celebrate his finishing his ph.d and he
told me oh I'm bringing a date with me
and it was myself and my wife and so we
were going out today
he said but I just want to give you a
heads up professor she's a you know
she's a radical feminist
and a post modernist and a cultural
anthropologist so can we tone it down
to which I said Oh mum's the word of
course I wasn't gonna keep quiet we knew
that that promise was going to be
violated at some point so during the
evening at one point I said to the lady
so I hear you're a postmodernist yes I
said well do you mind if I offer you so
Postma if there are no objective truths
do you mind if I offer you because as an
evolutionary psychologist I do work
under the assumption that there are
universal truths there are things called
human universals so can I pitch some
what I consider to be universal and then
you could tell me how I'm wrong yep go
ahead say okay well within Homo sapiens
only women bear children so I prophesy I
was being prophetic about the whole blue
sea sixteen way before it happened I
said only women can bear children is
that is that a universal she looked at
me with utter disgust with contempt she
huffed and puffed she rolled her eyes so
absolutely not no it's not only women
that bear children she goes no there is
a try a Japanese tribe off some Island
where within the spiritual realm within
their spiritual doctrines it is men who
bear children by you restricting the
conversation to the biological
materialist realm that's how you keep us
barefoot and pregnant after I recovered
from my mini-stroke I then asked okay
well maybe it's too controversial for me
to argue that women bear children that's
that seems to be too taboo let's take a
slightly more innocuous example is it
true since time immemorial that sailors
have presumed that the Sun rises in the
east and sets in the west is that is
that true he or she used something
called deconstructionism she said what
do you mean I don't play labels what do
you mean by east and west what do you
mean by Sun that which you call Sun
I call and now you understand I call
dancing hyena
and there I said but fine so the dancing
hyena rises in the east and sets in the
west if I don't put dancing hyena lotion
on my skin I might get us dancing hyena
burn she said no no I don't play those
games now that's not she wasn't an
anomaly she wasn't an outlier she is
what is being taught to all your kids
was your hard earned money not only are
you losing all the money you are
infecting those children or young adults
with idiotic
anti science anti reason anti logic
nonsense so there's a real cost to
allowing these viruses to proliferate
let me just mention a few other examples
so this is the liberating lens of
academic feminism the list is actually
much longer but there are fields
feminist science feminist mathematics
mathematics we have a mathematician here
I mean I thought that mathematics would
be the one area where we can absolutely
be free of identity politics no and I'll
talk about it in a second let's go down
well feminist business school is the
idea that the term profit took to profit
capitalism these are inherently
patriarchal ways of viewing the economy
and therefore we need to build business
schools that are based on a more sort of
inclusive feminist ethos and then
feminist biology this is not satire this
is true this paper has been cited over
1200 times published in the University
of Chicago Press journals so this is not
some sort of quack paper paper published
or whatever you know nonsense journal
she argues that the whole manner by
which we describe conception there is an
egg and she's passive so she's Victorian
and then there are these spermatozoa
that are active and adventuresome and so
on that whole thing that language to
describe conception
and that way is already starting this
you know sexist gender rules
she is not joking she's not being
satirical she's a very serious quote
scholar who's been cited 1200 times
prophetic satire and actually the math
there's a mathematician in this room
would at lunch told me oh I I watched
this clip of yours here by the way this
is when I'm doing when I'm satirizing
the social justice warriors I bring out
this what do you call it the wake thank
you I was thinking of the term in French
the first time that I brought out that
wig I called my wife I said hey do you
know where that red wig is and she's
like what why are you asking this don't
worry about it and eventually that wig
has become part of the sad truth
classics so here what I did is I I had
said this was completely a satirical
this is kind of a SoCal hoax type of
clip I said that I had founded a new
field as someone who had studied
mathematics and someone was very
progressive and you know into social
justice I found that a new field called
social justice mathematics and so in
doing so you should really watch the
clip and by the way that prophetic
satire is now reality for example I
argue that irrational numbers is
absolutely bad think as it marginalizes
mental illness the inequality operator
creates an ableist mentality prime real
and perfect numbers it's all divisive
language binary numbers they perpetuate
fixed binaries Laplace transform uses
the trans prefix so it is transphobic
and equilateral triangles are inclusive
isosceles and scalene triangles are
bigoted and actually some people wrote
to me and they actually didn't think
that I was being satirical and it was
like good stuff well a year later I
start getting calls from the media
asking me to comment about exactly what
my prophecy was which is now there was a
book that was written saying that we
need to have more social justice in
mathematics the
mathematics as currently taught as white
supremacy and so on and so forth so that
which I had thought no one could ever
come up with such stupidity
it only took ten months and it caught up
to my satire decolonized science so this
is really basically saying out with the
epistemology of science right now here
is a Quebec Deputy Minister who got
pushback recently because he questioned
the place of indigenous traditional
knowledge now let me let me be clear as
an evolutionary psychologist I
understand that people have ecological
knowledge that's specific to an
ecosystem so nobody is questioning that
right so you could have been in the
particular region where you've been
there for many many generations and you
could have knowledge about the fauna and
flora this is content knowledge this is
ecological knowledge that you absolutely
have greater knowledge than the rest of
us that doesn't mean that at the Epis
thermo logical level you have different
way of knowing you don't solve cancer
either through sexist Western medicine
or you dance to the Rainman doing
booga-booga right that's not how it
works so yes we should be respectful of
local knowledge that people may have but
there is only one epistemology there's
only one game in town it's called a
scientific method and so other ways of
knowing are not equal if they're going
to be equal then they have to be put
through this exact same scrutiny of the
scientific method and so University of
Capetown a rather prestigious university
in the African continent held a sit-in
where they said science must fall and
the people who were promulgating that
idea are now known as Follis the idea
that science itself all of science
Darwin Newton it's all built on one way
of knowing and there are other ways of
knowing and if you attack those ways of
knowing then you are engaging an episome
illogical colonialism and here's an
example of a paper published in a real
journal where they exactly argue that
so these are real cancers of the human
mind they're there they really are
intellectual terrorism right now now I'm
gonna get I'm almost done now I'm gonna
get to I guess some prescriptive stuff
before I do that let me talk about two
nonsensical ideas social constructivism
is really the idea that we're born
tabula rasa with empty minds and it is
only the processes of socialization that
make us who we are now as an
evolutionist I don't question the fact
that socialization is important of
course we're socialized we're socialized
by our parents and our rabbis and and
television if that's all true but by the
way socialization happens in its form
because of biology so it's not
antithetical it's not biology or the
environment nurture happens because of
nature okay but in any case we are born
with biological imperatives it's
trivially obvious to show this you show
that for example by taking children who
are too young to have been socialized
and show that they have certain
preferences that they could not have
learned I'll talk about that in a second
so the idea of hard radical social
constructivism is complete nonsense but
if it's something that's been
promulgated in the social sciences and
the humanities for 30 40 years bio
phobia is kind of a a consequence of
that bio phobia is fear of biology so
biology is OK in describing the behavior
of the mosquito and the rabbit and the
zebra but don't you dare apply biology
to explain human affairs somehow humans
transcend biology right that's what
makes us human according to these folks
what makes us human is that we are not
under the purview of the same biological
imperatives as the zebra
we're cultural animals and of course
we're not we're both cultural animals
and biological animals so how would you
dismantle something like this so next
what I'm going to talk about is a
epistemological tool that you could all
use when you're having these trench
ideological warfare with people so take
for example well why do you think I put
these two Tory things so Tory
preferences is sort of one of the
classic examples of
so-called social constructivism the idea
is that little boys are taught to play
aggressively with blue trucks little
girls are taught to play in a nurturing
manner with pink dolls and that starts a
cascade of gender specific socialization
right and a truly progressive person
would have their son play with dolls and
would have their daughter play with guns
right but if you're a toy company you
don't care about ideological dogma you
care about selling things and so that's
why practitioners typically never give
me grief for my theories because they
don't care about ideological dogma they
care about how do you describe reality
as it really exists right so let's see
if I could construct for you this is
called bear with me this is a bit
technical excuse me.
This is called a nomological network
of cumulative evidence. What does that
mean? If I want to make an argument that
something is an adaptation, something is
due to a biological cause, what I'm going
to do is I'm going to try... so for example
here are toy preferences biological base
or are they completely social
constructions? Ok? So then I would think
what would be the data that I would have
to show you to prove to you in an
unassailable manner that there is a
biological basis to toy preferences and
that epistemological process is what I
call nomological networks of
cumulative evidence. And I'll go through
a few. I won't go through all of them but
I'll give you a bit of an example.
Charles Darwin himself had used
nomological networks although he didn't
call it that in his days when he was you
know collecting all of the data for
Origin of Species over a 20-plus year
period what was he effectively doing?
He was methodically, judiciously
collecting data from endless different
sources which when you put it all
together it became impossible to dispute
his theory. And if 150 years later
a lot of very motivated people have
tried to dispute it and it still stands.
And so let me show you how we could
apply it in the current context. Well I
could take children - look at this one
this comes from developmental psychology -
I could take children who are in the pre
socialization stage meaning that they
don't yet have the cognitive development
to be socialized so by definition I'm
ruling out that possibility and I could
show that they exhibit sex-specific toy
preferences that boys will reach out to
the truck or stare at the truck more and
vice-versa for girls so already that
first box is casting doubt on the idea
that it's all due to social construction
but let's see if I can give you a few
more that really build sort of the
tsunami of evidence against that
position you could take this is called
comparative psychology this one here I
could look to other animals so I could
take rhesus monkeys I could take vervet
monkeys I could take chimpanzees and I
could show that the infant's within
those species exhibit the same sex
specific type references now are they
also being under the influence of
patriarchal sexism or might there be
some homology across the behaviors now
if that's not enough let me do one more
but if we did all of them believe me
even the one who is least convinced
would be convinced by the end of this
lecture you could take people kids who
suffer from something called congenital
adrenal hyperplasia which is an
endocrinology cool disorder if little
girls suffer from it they become
masculinized
they become masculinized in their
morphology and in their behavior well
you take little girls who suffer from
this under chronological disorder and
you study their toy preferences what do
you think happens to their toy
preferences they become masculinized so
if I stop the conversation right there
I'm not gonna do all of them already
that is casting huge doubt on your idea
that it's all due to the vagaries of the
evil patriarchy I didn't have to get
into histrionics I had to just simply be
very judicious and think about what are
the
variety of data that I could offer you
to convince you that your peddling
bullshit right and someone earlier I
won't point to them said to me you know
how is it that you carry yourself and
such public forums with such confidence
well part of it is the luckiness of the
random combination of genes that led to
who I am
I happen to just be confident but part
of it comes from not speaking about
something unless I'm fully confident
that the data fully supports me and the
way that I do that is by building these
neurological networks
and so all of us in this room should
certainly benefit from understanding
that epistemology if you want to know if
a particular religion is peaceful or not
build the normal logical network there
is a wide range of data that you could
collect that's already been collected
for you that will unequivocally answer
the question of whether Islam is
peaceful or not whether Jainism is
peaceful or not you don't have to guess
you don't have to listen to your friend
you could you could build that data
there with me a bit I think we're still
okay bear with me does anybody know what
the hygiene hypothesis is you do oh
that's good in evolutionary medicine
evolutionary medicine is basically
applying evolutionary principles
well in medicine understanding the
adaptive processes that led to our
bodies to be able to better cure
diseases the hygiene hypothesis is a
beautiful idea that basically said well
it's not an idea it's been confirmed
empirically so if you take children who
suffer from respiratory ailments or
those who don't it turns out that
whether they've been exposed from a
young age to respiratory pathogens
determines whether they're going to
suffer from ailments and it might not be
what you think intuitively if they've
grown up in very sterile environments
that's when they develop respiratory
ailments why because their immune system
has not received the inputs to kick in
their immunological defenses so if I
grow up in an OCD sterile home
I'm more likely to vote to develop
asthma if I grow up in an environment
where there are pets and a bit of dander
here and there I'm less likely to
develop asthma so this brilliant
neuropsychiatry Steve I wish I had come
up with the idea but he beat me to it
Steve stanky vicious analogize this to
ideas he said that what we're doing in
universities is creating sterile
environments sterile echo chambers akin
to the the allergens right you need
allergens to develop your protection for
against respiratory ailments you need
contrary ideas to develop your capacity
to think to develop your capacity for
critical thinking it's a it's a truly
beautiful analogy so let's see how
whether we have political echo chambers
at universities or not this study just
came out the the author Lang bird had
actually emailed me to to tell me about
his paper so this is a study that was
done 51 of the top ranked liberal arts
colleges eight thousand six hundred and
eighty eight so this is a very big very
representative sample size more than
five thousand of which registered as
either Democrats or Republicans and all
I'm going to show you here I won't go
through all of them it's the ratio of
Democrats to Republicans across
disciplines the least lopsided the least
lopsided is one point six not now for
example in medicine if you had a one
point six odds ratio that would be a
huge effect right here that's the least
one is that one point six now let's keep
going I won't do all of them very
quickly you get to eight point two to
one ratio and let's keep going oh yes
sociology forty three point eight
anthropology you can't calculate the
Democrat to Republican ratio because
it's a unicorn he doesn't exist the
Republican it's fifty-six to zero and in
communications it's 108 to zero now you
might say and I
I receive as you might imagine endless
emails from people sometimes they write
to me I say well so what's the big deal
with that professors are smart so of
course they're going to be democratic
Bohr you must be part of the problem
right on many issues like fiscal policy
foreign policy is the death penalty a
good idea for serial pedophiles or not
there is no absolute scientific truth
there are compelling arguments to be
made both pro and con any of these
issues now I might fit on this side you
might fit but but there really is value
in hearing your side of why you think
the death penalty is good or bad but
imagine if you grown up or been
inculcated in an ideological sterile
environment you don't build your
defenses and just to show you the next
slide it turns out that the more
prestigious university is so in this
case you break it up into tiers tier 1
meaning most prestigious and so on the
more prestigious the university is the
more lopsided so the most prestigious
universities the ratio of Democrats to
Republicans is twenty-one point five to
one
that's just breathtaking so heterodox
Academy which some of you know that's
what they're trying to do they're trying
to fight that incredibly politically
sterile environment that we see in
universities Canadian universities I
won't go through the whole thing but
it's roughly the same it's it's the same
sort of bias so last slide how do we
save our universities so let me just
read it for you
number one pursue knowledge unencumbered
by ideological activism no knowledge is
forbidden if gathered objectively using
the scientific method I I had a chat
last year with some of you may know him
Sam Harris on his show and he asked me
in your research is there anything that
you would consider forbidden to study
and my answer was a very quick
absolutely not if you study it with
complete objectivity and adhering as
best as you can to the scientific method
then you could never have the calculus
of oh but what if someone event
misuses that then physics should never
have been studied because it led to the
atomic bomb right I mean it's an endless
slippery slope
no more identity politics instead
promote the dignity of the individual
rather than supporting oppression
Olympics and victimology poker
no more coddling of the culture of
offense and the ethos of perpetual
victimhood no microaggressions no
trigger warnings no safe spaces and no
cultural appropriation my personal
history is that we escaped Lebanon under
imminent threat of execution
could you imagine for someone with my
personal history to watch the kind of
whining that I see in the West and what
kind of offense you want to talk about
offense it's an offense to the endless
panoply of ways by which people truly
suffer around the world to have these
coddled and Fant alized folks it's it's
a it's an affront to what true suffering
is that just society is rooted in the
ethos of meritocracy we are not social
ants and the the point I'm making here
is that social ants eat Oh Wilson the
famous evolutionary biologist and
entomologist said regarding socialism
and communism he said wonderful system
wrong species okay so so communism is
great and socialism is great when you're
a social ant but for a species that does
have hierarchies then maybe that's not a
great thing
promote an ethos of course intellectual
and political diversity all ideas
beliefs and ideologies are open to
criticism I mean here I'm preaching to
the converted no speech codes no hostile
environment and so on and so forth
science reasoned logic and a commitment
to evidence based thinking Trump
ideology hurt feelings and fashionable
anti science full intellectual gibberish
thank you very much
dr. sad will Nell take questions and
comments and again this mic doesn't
amplify it merely records if I can go
back to what you said about social
justice math so my mom's a teacher in
elementary school at BC and there's a
new curriculum it's all online you can
see it and in the math section for all
elementary school grades
it says part of the learning outcomes is
integrate indigenous world views and
perspectives on mathematical concepts so
is there any validity to this or is it
just nonsense without knowing the
specific case I'm going to go with
nonsense so in other words if there were
true indigenous knowledge that somehow
adds to the cursus of mathematical
knowledge bring it on great but is there
some mathematical knowledge that exists
outside of the axioms of mathematics
that only indigenous people are you know
exposed to know as I say each of these
things I'm already counting the tally of
death threats I'll be receiving I guess
I'll it'll get a little disturbed with
the Tribune all of this to universities
like administrators aren't universities
you know a lot of this is going on
within certain departments and faculties
within universities and I think if you
find the people who are resistant to a
lot of these ideas they're probably more
in say science for example in other
sorts of areas and isn't there a danger
that we're sort of tarnishing you know
the institution as a whole you know with
these particular sorts of cases I mean
you don't need to have every single
person at a university suffer from this
nonsense or every person being a
perpetrator of that nonsense for you to
be concerned by it right how many
victims do we need before we sort of
stand up and
an indigent would you know what being
indignant right I mean think about it
and in the humanities and social
sciences I mean there are now 40 years
of students that have been taught you
know some of the most impenetrable fake
nonsense and I mean again think about
the opportunity cost every single one of
these students could have done something
unbelievably more productive with their
time and that to me is a is it
gargantuan injury no I'm not saying not
to be concerned but you know if you have
a cancer somewhere you don't assume the
whole body ain't needs to be treated and
so there's areas of the university a
that are cancerous and that what we
should be careful about is targeting
those areas rather than saying you know
the administration is the university for
exists for example or you're the
behavior of a group in a cultural
anthropology class is the University and
and so on I teach psychology and I teach
a balanced approach to a heritability
and you know socialization I never get
any objections from my students they
aren't up in arms you know because I'm
doing that and so on so again I just
think we've got something that's more of
a localized but very visible yeah sort
of problem Alex so I want to thank you
for coming and speaking with all of us
that was very unlike I'm a Concordia
graduate myself in communications in
cultural studies so I do appreciate you
coming here to London what I want to ask
you about is your thoughts on the
difference first part between Quebec
institutions so french-speaking Quebec
institutions Concordia and McGill aside
the Yukon udm and if you see that
because Quebec is more nationalistic in
their culture and in their history do
you see that they are less prone to
these ideological viruses you speak
about and you also often give the
distinction between you know academic
institutions to the West versus places
elsewhere but do you think that this is
more of a North American issue or do you
see
epidemic in European schools in Asian
schools and so forth so I think I think
the the what I call ostrich parasitic
syndrome which is sort of the collection
of these maladies can afflict anybody
anywhere so I was I was asked is this
something that afflicts people on the
left more and my answer is no and in its
current manifestation yes because a lot
of the voices are coming from the left
in this case but it could have so for
example science denialism doesn't happen
only on the left or on the right it's a
different form of science denialism that
happens right so if when it comes to for
example denying evolution it'll be the
people on the right who deny evolution
they're sort of the religious folks when
it comes to denying evolutionary
psychology or the fact that there's a
biological basis to our human nature it
is people on the left so I so I don't
think it is it is restricted to a
geographical location or a political
aisle I think what makes this so
problematic is that anybody anytime can
be and some of my very good friends some
of the folks that you guys all know and
respect regrettably have now fallen
victims to o-p-s I won't mention names
but they have Stephen I want to avoid
polemics from myself because this is
questions for you but I do have to
follow up on the previous comment I'm a
psychologist and I think psychology has
been poisoned I not as badly as
sociology obviously and not as badly as
humanities but psychology has been
poisoned my research has been stifled
I've been rejected for little grants
that should have been given me because I
asked the wrong questions
I'm constantly worried but what I say
but I also have a close relationship
with my colleagues in biology I've been
acting chair of the biology department
and I tell them repeatedly they're
coming for you and they're coming for
you so yes I mean humanities I mean
education has always been lost and but I
think it's wrong to think that it's that
it's segregated to certain parts it's a
matter of how advanced the the virus is
could you comment on that well I think
so it's kind of linked both of your
comments
that you often hear this you know the
neighborhood where I live I don't see
that particular problem so clearly it
must not exist I think you have to have
a wider view you don't have a heart
attack and you're healthy until you drop
dead from a heart attack but three
minutes earlier you said this cannot
affect me I'm perfectly fine so I think
that notwithstanding the fact that you
may not have experienced it yourself I
think it is something that we should all
be very concerned about I'll just give
you one example I comment about issues
outside of what we're talking about here
for example whether certain religious
ideologies that might be antithetical to
every single liberal values that that we
hold dear anybody in this room whether
it's a good idea to have a increase of
those values in Canada right oftentimes
I get tons of people who write to me and
say but but I don't see any of the stuff
you're talking about I go buy my
tomatoes and I go to my daughters I
don't see it that's a myopic view sort
of open the neighborhood to outside of
your neighborhood it's it's coming it's
over there it's around the corner so I
think you're right I think you're
fortunate that you haven't seen it grant
an earlier and earlier commenter was
saying don't brand the whole University
with the same brush my problem with that
attitude is when something like this
we're talking about today happens
there's one or two there's David Haskell
and there's some times in the past Clive
who would stand up and written mark now
we rant and rave about it but but 99.9%
of the university would be silent about
it Oh or support him and so in that
sense yes brand the whole university
with that brush because they're the ones
who are sitting by idly allowing it to
happen without any objection without any
you know I'm looking at my own career
and I'm you know hunkered down and I'm
not gonna say anything about it because
I don't want it to affect me yes it is a
university-wide problem you know it's
thank you for saying that because I
often receive emails from professors who
privately say oh my god thank you so
much for what I say well why do you send
me a private email why don't you advert
position is it are you are you are you
ashamed of your soup I mean am I on the
wrong side of the issues but that's the
problem there but in their silence
they're complicit so you don't have to
have everybody at the University be a
rabid social justice warrior if you know
that they exist and you do nothing about
it as far as I'm concerned you're as
guilty as they are Rick one thing I will
say about the as a comment to your
ostrich parasitic syndrome is this year
when I just talked about things like sex
differences in my introductory
psychology class just the way word
spread and you know students who had
been you know quite close to me in terms
of you know a good working relationship
just suddenly stopped talking to me it
was real I open you to see how quickly
it takes over in the way and just how
how intense the effect is so the guess
the question I have is the way I almost
see it is how do we actually cure the
people who have been infected it - like
the the only thing that seems to come to
mind is maybe try to do research on the
deprogramming of cult members but I
wasn't I wouldn't wanted to know what
your thoughts were like for the actual
people who are afflicted what we
actually do for them I mean I truly
think that it's a question of teaching
people how to better think I mean I know
it sounds very grand but it's it's
really amazing when you when you
challenge people for example if you say
if someone says religion X is peaceful
okay I say okay well how did you arrive
at this I challenge them right so it's
kind of somewhat a Socratic process it's
sort of a appointed epistemological
approach it's really teaching people to
not be cognitively lazy you know most
people so as a consumer psychologist one
of the things I study is you know when
you're trying to simplify the
information overload and your
environment you might use a simplifying
heuristic like Japanese product
electronic products are great right that
allows me to very quickly choose a
product without having to do more search
right so most of us have a sort of an
innate desire to be cognitive misers but
for some of these issues you can't be a
cognitive misers
you really have to ask people to get
engaged in building these neurological
networks and so that's how I am
I'm sure there are many strategies I try
to convince people by the overwhelming
data that goes against their position
and usually I'm able to to be quite
successful at it I have bill and Ava and
Joanne and David and maybe we'll have
some more time after that or we'll see
no problem that question what's driving
this as a psychologist and sex
researcher I often use the metaphor of
fetish the reactions to establish
knowledge epistemology methodology
conversations such as the ones we're
having correspond to the characteristics
of a fetish reaction to a fetish object
they're highly selective they're
uncontrollable and they're exaggerated
and I see people you know who are making
the pronouncements that we're talking
about the anti scientism the
post-modernism etc I think the dynamic
is some kind of nearly orgasmic pleasure
the condemning the condemning of an
established knowledge somehow confers
virtue on the individual and and
pleasure what what do you think the
dynamic is well that's that's a great
question I guess I'll be talking about
some of the stuff in my book yeah let me
let me go back to that slide
I don't I don't think there's a singular
explanation I think it's a it's a
cocktail of different pathologies so for
example when it comes to the victimology
mentality I've coined the term or the
malady collective Munchausen or
collective Munchausen by proxy
right so for those of you who don't know
munchausen syndrome is a psychiatric
disorder whereby someone
feigns a medical illness so that they
can garner sympathy and empathy
munchausen syndrome by proxy is when you
take someone who's under your care
typically your biological child but it
could be a pet it could be an elderly
parent and you harm them so that then
you can get the pleasure of the empathy
and the sympathy by proxy well when I
see the victimology right it's not I
think therefore I am it's I'm a victim
therefore I am so there is a form of
collective Munchausen whereby the main
currency now is I get my strokes my
pleasure
through being a victim either myself or
by proxy I'm the social justice warrior
who's helping those poor victims so that
would be that would explain the
victimology mentality the post-modernism
I actually think I have a not nearly as
sort of psychoanalytic explanation as
yours so Jacques Derrida Michel Foucault
and Jacques Lacan and the rest of the
French post modernists scammers I think
simply stumbled on a way to get tons of
people to actually show up and in
complete reverence listen to their
complete random gibberish and take them
seriously and as someone who studies
peacocking behavior
I can peacock by buying an Aston Martin
I can peacock by getting Harvard degrees
or I can peacock if you give me the
opportunity of standing up in front of
adoring undergrads and saying that the
transposed eigenvalue of my inner-self
right and all the rest of the bullshit
and there's a bunch of people who think
that because I'm engaging in what
appears to be pseudo profundity I must
be saying something important and I get
all the hot women on camp
so I think it's really as simple as that
they found an arbitrage profit to use an
MBA right they found a way to be worthy
in the ecosystem why do the chemists
sorry well no I think it's why are the
chemists and the physicists and the
biologists getting all the attention
we also are important in the humanities
right but it has to be something as
impenetrable as what the mathematician
is doing and what the physicist is doing
right and the way I achieve that is
instead of using mathematical symbols I
use impenetrable complete random prose
there must be some profundity to it in
the bullshit I want to come back to what
Lynn your comment Lindsey you've
mentioned that this has been going on
stuff for 40 years in the years
generations of students have been
bamboozled and wasted their time an hour
long our tax money actually it's a bit
longer than that for those of us who are
older than you would have probably
started in the 60s I was I happen to be
living in Paris in the 60s at the time
and I saw all of it okay this this
horrible business is now moving to our
schools and this teaching of this gender
stuff and now indigenous mathematics and
great 1b can teach children how to add
and multiply and subtract but we're
going to introduce all these extraneous
elements into it the danger for our
societies is now really very bad and I
just like you to comment on this
penetration now into the schools well in
in when you're trying to advertise to
children there are different countries
have different laws but typically one
argument is that you you shouldn't be
allowed to target children let's say
you're selling cereal I'm gonna come to
your point you shouldn't be able to
target children and selling them cereals
because they can't build a
counter-argument to it so only when
they're able to have the cognitive
capacity to develop resistance to the
persuasive message that's when you're
allowed right but can you think of one
product that you're allowed to
get your children straight out of the
womb no religion right so I can't sell
chewing gum to a child when when he's
eight or nine because you know he's too
cognitively fragile because of my
persuasive message but straight out of
the womb I could sell him my nonsense
and nobody can do anything about it so
then to answer your question it exactly
I need to get to that child at the point
where he's got no defenses that's when
the buck is happening that's as simple
and it's not conspiratorial it really is
what's happening Joanna
I'd like to get back quickly to the
slide where you talked about we don't
necessarily have to go there but let's
just recapture when you were talking
about how convenient it is for it's a
various disciplines to say well people
act biological people act driven by
culture when we're trying to understand
their behavior and their sexuality but
then the various inconsistencies a creep
in for example when people are seen as
purely biological purely animals driven
by biology when we're considering for
example ecological questions so my my
quick that's my quick comment my
question to you is do you see a way that
we can bring a lot of these then we can
bring the inconsistencies out and start
bringing a discussion in which we're
actually considering people as as both
more holistically so that those who want
to condemn let's say a people's
ecological behavior don't get away with
saying well we're just like bacteria
when those who are saying well we're
purely social constructs get away with
it a moment before that evolutionary
psychologists don't argue that we are
strictly biological beings rather the
formal position is what's called
interactionism in other words no
evolutionary psychologists worth his
salt doesn't recognize that for most
traits that matter we are inextricable
mix of our biology and our environment
absolutely but that's not what we hear
right so evolutionists or from or from
the ideologues from philosophy so the
inconsistency that I was talking about
is that people who are often let's say
if we're looking at ecological arguments
so for example population is spreading
too quickly right so human population
growth must be stopped people are seen
as multiplying like bacteria are
multiplying like other Malthusian
organisms right that are going to
multiply as long as there are resources
for them and then there's going to be a
population crash right well as the other
perspective that you were discussing
earlier is is a perspective of more more
culturally driven so all I'm trying to
say is that I wish we could build from
the Manama logical networks that would
be more visible that we could then apply
to problems across this so one of the
night I don't think I've ever mentioned
this publicly so maybe this is as
they're taping me maybe this will be the
time to do it so one of the projects
that I'm hoping to start is a website
where people can submit their
nomological network for some phenomenon
so that that way after a certain time
period
you know instead of looking at it's not
a literature review right the normal
logical network is not a literature
review it's it's a completely different
way of thinking it's what is all the
data that I need to have that would
render this argument unassailable and so
imagine now if you could go to this
website and you want to look at
pornography the evolutionary roots of
pornography well there is a normal
optical network that exists so I'm
hoping to do exactly what you're asking
for and that's one of my next projects
David thanks for your talk dad what I
was wondering about is well first of all
just by way of background so when I
study religious groups and they're gonna
hire they're gonna hire a pastor they
have ideological conformity so it's a
board they're gonna hire a pastor
they're not gonna hire anybody who
doesn't have their same ideological
background and really so now I look at
your slide where you show me that in
communications for example they
don't have anybody else except those who
are like-minded right so it's
inconceivable that they would ever hire
somebody else outside their tribe Yeah
right
so we're never going to have that
diversity of opinion so my question is
knowing that there are certain programs
that are ideological tribes and they are
absolutely hostile to outsiders how do
we ever how do we change that yeah it's
a tough guy mean the the sort of the the
vague response to that but it might
sound gimmicky is I tell people that to
the extent that we are innately tribal
right so we are coalitional animals we
do see the world as Blue Team and Red
Team you know whatever try to then
instantiate your desire to belong to the
tribe of truth now we can get into what
this truth mean but in other words don't
let me give you a specific example I
often get someone who writes to me and
says well you know I watch all your
stuff I read all your stuff I can't tell
are you conservative are you liberal are
you this are you that and my answer is
I'm none of those things I'm a one idea
at a time person so sometimes you'll on
the death penalty for example I'm
someone who thinks we don't have to get
into all this now but I believe that if
you are a serial rapist of children and
we have ten your DNA in the the rectum
of ten children
I feel no moral difficulty of executing
you okay on that dimension then you
would think orgy disguise right-wing
when it comes to social issues I'm about
as liberal as they come you would think
I'm a social justice warrior I mean sort
of speak right so I'm an ideas guy
Ayelet whatever cognitive consistency
that exists within me allow me to take
positions I don't belong to left I don't
belong to classical liberal I don't
belong a so what I would love for people
to do is foster that vent simply take
piecemeal ideas at a time and then using
whatever moral compass you have form an
opinion that's hopefully informed that's
it a few more questions gather or you
okay good
all right well Christopher then yeah so
you talked a lot about anti science and
all that kind of stuff
from I'm in psychology and the vibe I
get now is that it's starting to
actually happen under the guise of
science with for example in personality
psychology and social psychology there's
benevolent sexism and all that kind of
stuff and so can I can I explain what
that is before you give you a sure and
actually I have written several articles
great yeah so in the neverending desire
to find sexism everywhere it turns out
that the standard form of sexism that
you would all be familiar with and that
you would condemn is called hostile
sexism but there's another form of
pernicious sexism
that's called benevolent sexism so if
you are got long to a woman that's
benevolent sexism if you open the door
to a woman that's benevolent sexism if
she is being attacked by three men and
you come to save her now you're in a
real difficult position do I save her
and then I'm a sexist or do I pretend I
didn't hear her screaming and I could at
least avoid the appellation of being a
sexist so that's what benevolent sexism
is folks go ahead yep so you talk a lot
of it like the solution to what we can
do as citizens and and every end as
academics and teaching but now since
it's actually gone into peer review and
I think the benevolent sexism scale has
like three thousand citations something
ridiculous and and a lot of it isn't
very critical I I feel like as academics
and as researchers we can actually
challenge that through science since
instead of just accepting it as accepted
science even though it's total crap yeah
so your question is what can we do to
fight against this fight against this in
other words don't you know Irish I mean
really I receive enumerable emails from
people what can I do what can I do just
you don't have to have a huge platform
your professor says something that
completely defies logic challenge them
respectfully politely with civility
right but challenge them don't be quiet
don't don't do what regrettably Lindsey
had to do which is feel that she
couldn't speak your you're a professor
at a meeting someone says something that
is contrary to human dignity challenged
them on it everybody has a voice in this
battle its ideological trench warfare
just get engaged from the smallest
possible way to the biggest possible way
Joanne I know that this is to talk about
what's happening in the universities but
it's really starting in JK it's starting
in elementary school with the
victimology that everybody has to get a
trophy nobody can fail I know in 1992 I
was fighting cold language with my
children I quit my job rented a church
and ran a school for three years or my
middle child would have been illiterate
now I would be doing the same thing over
the sex ed but now we have 30% of our
children in grade six are not competent
in math or reading there is something
wrong here and what we're teaching them
is you are a victim and you d you you
warrant being praised for everything
they teach phonics they teach the
initial consonant and anything you guess
for that word they tell you it's a great
job even though every word is wrong so I
think that what this all is happening
now is just a manifestation of what has
been going on for many many years
starting with JK Daniel I have a
question I'm a PhD student computer
science in particular I find it
interesting with my peers often times
especially with say some controversies
involving the Google memo yes I find a
lot of my peers don't speak out in favor
of the conclusions that were in that
memo but and oftentimes they're very
intelligent people but they don't speak
up like on the other side but then often
I'll find that faculty within my
department not necessarily my department
but in other universities that have been
us been a part of they oftentimes will
not like that would be the only side
you'll hear is the one against the
domore memo right now I always say I
don't like to come oh this is involving
sex differences and the demographics you
find within the tech industry so I can
maybe I can summarize it for the people
who don't know because I actually knew
about it
so just to give you the background to
that story I had been invited to the
Google main campus to give a lecture but
what's part of what they call the talks
at Google series and my talk was on how
my you know evolutionary psychology
stuff right and then a few days after
that the Google memo broke so the rumor
on the internet was it was someone who
had been at my talk who had been
emboldened by it and and so then before
the whole thing breaks out I was in
contact with James the more it's for him
to come on my show I was in California
on vacation with my family but then the
the Google people who are who were fans
were invited me said if you speak to
James the more we can guarantee you
what's going to happen to your lecture
meaning that it would never be posted
and so we took the very sort of
pragmatic decision of holding off our
conversation until after Google had
posted my talk but the fact that we even
have to engage in this mental calculus
is extraordinary this is supposed to be
Google but they do no evil and they were
engaging in evil yes so my question is
and since I'm kind of early on in my
academic career but I obviously like to
go to the academic route I'm one of
these theory people I love my
theoretical computer science do you have
any advice for any PhD students that
really are wanting to help fix this
problem whether fixing is the right word
yeah and whether it be short term or
long term
any advice for save researchers and that
that want to fight in this battle any
advice for them that they could use now
because right now obviously if say for
example if I were to be very openly
against some of the policies that are
out right now especially in CS
departments yes for example there are
one example now it's not usually talked
about as often as there's for example
women only scholarships and a lot of CSS
departments which I find yeah but
anyways my main point is what advice can
you give for PhD students that wants to
maybe find a tenure-track position if
they're one that exists I got it well
too
avoid job security you know I've always
conflicted when people ask me that
question because I understand the
pragmatic reality of people having real
concerns but those concerns arise not
just as you as a PhD student if now I'm
an assistant professor should I speak or
wait till I'm tenured now when I am
tenured should I speak or wait Abdulla
half full professor
now I'm full professors should I wait or
until I have my chair professorship now
I'm sure professor but I think I have a
good shot at the Nobel Prize should I
speak or wait until that well now I'm
dead should I speak or write so my point
is this is there's a in ecological
economics some of you may be familiar
with something called tragedy of the
Commons right so let me just briefly
mention it for those of you who don't
know suppose I've got a plot of land and
they've got ten farmers and we all agree
gentlemen agreement none of us is going
to use that plot of land for our cattle
to graze on it because we need it to
recover right now each of us thinks well
you know what if I cheat on that
agreement I get my cattle to graze on
the land but the other nine guys will be
super honorable that's the ideal outcome
because I still get to do what I want
and all the others will be good of
course the tragedy of the Commons is
that every single one falls under that
premise and then we all cheat and the
whole thing goes to hell how do we how
do we apply this to what you're saying
so the tragedy of the Commons you know I
don't have to speak because I worry
about my career but let him speak let
God speak let Jordan Peterson speak
that's some other guy who puts his neck
out speak because I got to worry about
my PhD I got to worry about my sis I got
no if we all were able to develop the
term that you heard me use in the
Canadian Senate testicular fortitude and
speak in unison the problem would be
resolved very quickly but because we're
all bound to our myopic careerist
interests then it ends up being that the
bouncer could keep coming at you rise up
speak Matthew then cassia and then Phil
and I'm afraid we'll have to end it
there
Matthew two quick questions so Nick and
I have tried to put the Chicago
principles into Queens and one of the
things I found early on is getting our
initial signers was you'd have people
willing to sign but they wouldn't post
about it on their Facebook so expanding
on this taking a principled stance
versus the utilitarian stance up you
know
I'd ask the guy it's like you can you
sign this great you'd sign it and then
they wouldn't post about it's like you
know you have to why wouldn't you sign
it but you know also your your point
about you know needing to take a
principled stance do you have any sort
of specific advice on identifying when
it's better to take a utilitarian stance
and when it's better to take a
principled stance and then the second
one are you and then I wake you up in
the ontario school system so you know
I'd say both you know I graduated high
school in 2008 but I would say is you
know you talk about being ready to
defend yourself as a child talking about
the cereal analogy I would say we were
never really taught critical thinking
from a true like you know a true say a
first-year University logic course in in
high school and you say would you say
that you have any comments on the
sufficiency of the school system not
teaching basic logic so the second part
yes there's a complete lacunae of that
so I don't know what else to add other
than we need to foster greater critical
thinking that's really the point in my
next book your first comment when should
you be more utilitarian versus
principled it really is on a case by
case you know I sometimes I'll post
something where I'm really angry because
no one is rising up you know get engaged
and then someone will write say oh but
it's easy for you to say because you're
tenured but I've got two young kids and
I'm still a assistant professor right
but I received 3,000 death threats
nobody knows you
so who's suffering more right in other
words there is no way for you to get
engaged in war this is war this is
ideological war while being guaranteed
that there'll be no harm to you right
did you go to the invasion of Normandy
and say but I'll only sign up if you
could absolutely again because you know
I've got young kids because I've got my
uncle because I've got my PhD no you
went knowing that you might die so
that's the kind of courage we need to
foster if we all stood up together not
worried about our idiosyncratic concerns
and fought this horrible monster these
idea pathogens it will be resolved
quickly if not it's only going to
continue for the foreseeable future
cassia
I have a question I have a question
regarding this very interesting graph
and it's a conclusion to which I've kind
of arrived on my own but I obviously
don't have the empirical data to back it
up so why would you say I'm a humanities
background why would you say that
there's a greater like what explanation
is given that there for the greater
ratio of Democrat to Republican leaning
in those areas yes rather in the
humanities and not in engineering
because yeah I've had a conversation
with a math professor in which she says
what's all just you guys all you guys do
is opinion you guys talk about opinions
No so could you speak - yes I think it's
because a lot of those fields end up
being driven a lot more by an ethos of
activism rather than an ethos of
knowledge right so what I mean by that
is sociology inherently could be
perfectly scientific right there are
very serious sociologists a quantitative
mathematical sociologist that do very
very elaborate beautiful scientific work
they're not driven by activism there is
some phenomenon that they're interested
in studying at the sociological level
and they apply the weaponry of the
scientific method to study it the
problem is that in many of the fear
those fields what drop the eat the
driving engine that his own death of the
person is not the pursuit of knowledge
it's the promulgation of activism and
ideologies and therefore that's why
you're gonna get that lopsided stuff
it's more difficult in business or in
neuroscience or in engineering to have
thus lopsidedness because the people who
go into this can come in all varieties
there they're really to advance a field
of knowledge if you go into sociology
you've already self selected yourself as
an activist that's the problem
I forgot the sillim was on the list so
I'm not man my man thank you God your
your your slide on the various pathogens
on the one who had that you know yeah
that's the one the one you just repent
by on this one post-modernism oh that
hurt
what what's up yeah this one Don what
what surprised me or or or what I found
missing gap maybe you have a good reason
for it is that I would say that all the
box in the circle that you put up our
particular description of the viruses
but there is a metal virus afflicting
the West and the university is not
outside of the society and the metal
wires afflicting the West is
multiculturalism yeah everything falls
in that box it's it's not on this slide
just because I couldn't fit it away when
but the the little idea patches is
greater than this one I'm with you when
our prime minister says yes
soon after election to New York Time
magazine the Canada has no core culture
there is no mainstream the result is all
of this and much more and we the
Canadian people elect him resoundingly
yes I guess the what when I put cultural
relativism that's related to the
multicultural idea right because that
that's how you you promulgate that yeah
and now for our final question and
thanks very much for your patience Phil
my pleasure I took great pride in one of
those graphs but are the the ratios that
yeah my question is I don't know whether
is basically I well let's start I'm
finishing Martin Gilbert's book on the
history of Judaism under Islam yeah and
one of the things that strikes me as
that a religion is a kind of virus and
but but also it seems to be an inherent
part of how humans have evolved did it
have some survival value at stage yes
great question so if you if you'll
forgive me I just going to get a bit
technical with your with the answer when
you're studying
a cultural form let's say music art
religion from an evolutionary
perspective there are several ways that
you could study it one way is to argue
that that form has adaptive value right
so it's an adaptation I'll explain in a
second okay another way is to argue that
it is an exaptation and an adaptation is
that something confers either survival
or reproductive benefits so in the case
of religion an adaptive argument for
religion would be but and this is the
argument that David Sloan Wilson an
evolutionary biologist a good friend of
mine has made in a book called Darwin's
Cathedral if a group that is religious
has greater community greater cohesion
greater demarcation between us versus
them and if that confers survival
advantage to the group more so than a
group that lacks in religiosity that
would be an adaptive argument for
religion others are you know there is no
adaptation to religion rather religion
is an exaptation the key proponent of
that idea as a anthropologist by name of
Pascal ye who was on my show and the
argument there is that an exaptation
is a byproduct of evolution for example
the color of our the color of our
skeletal system whatever it is is not
due to the fact that that is an
adaptation it's a byproduct that's a
path dependency right so so then
applying it to religion we are for
example a coalitional animal we already
have the neuronal system to view the
world as us-versus-them
that neural system already exists
religion piggybacks on it on it right
right Abrahamic languages all have there
are the Jews the Gentiles the the
believers and the kafar the right they
are the ones who are going with Jesus
and the rest of us who are going to burn
in hell right so there's a very clear
demarcation between us versus them so
the exaptation argument is that there is
no adaptive value to religion it's just
something it uses its Mima plex it's
it's viral qualities to to latch on
systems
already exist and I'm not sure where I
stand on it because both arguments are
reasonably compelling to me thank you
very much